#summary Install DotProject on Debian/Ubuntu

= Introduction =

DotProject is a web-based, multi-user, multi-language Project Management application. It is an open-source software and free for any uses and is maintained by an open community of volunteer programmers.

= Install Apache2 + PHP modules =

{{{
$ apt-get install apache2 libapache2-mod-php5 php5 php5-mysql

$ ls  -al /etc/apache2/mods-enabled/php5.*
lrwxrwxrwx 1 /etc/apache2/mods-enabled/php5.conf -> ../mods-available/php5.conf
lrwxrwxrwx 1 /etc/apache2/mods-enabled/php5.load -> ../mods-available/php5.load

$ /etc/init.d/apache2 start
}}}

Point your browser to http://localhost, you should see a welcome message.

= Install & Configure Mysql =

Make sure you have mysql client and server packages installed (change version number if needed):

{{{
$ apt-get install mysql-client-5.0 mysql-server-5.0
}}}

If the server package is already installed but you don’t remember the root password (or want to change it):

{{{
$ dpkg-reconfigure mysql-server-5.0
}}}

It will be somewhat unwise to use root user to connect to our database, so we will create a special dotproject user for that purpose. Connect to Mysql server and run:

{{{
$ mysql --user=root --password
Enter password: ********

mysql> CREATE USER dotproject IDENTIFIED BY 'dotproject';
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)

mysql> GRANT ALL ON dotproject.* TO dotproject;
Query OK, 0 rows affected (0.00 sec)
}}}

= Download and install dotproject =

Download latest stable version from sourceforge and untar on /var/www:

{{{
$ cd /var/www
$ tar xvzf dotproject-2.1.2.tar.gz
}}}

= Configure dotproject = 

Point your browser to http://localhost/dotproject. Hopefully you will see:

{{{
Fatal Error. You haven't created a config file yet.
Click Here To Start Installation and Create One! (forwarded in 5 sec.)
}}}

Press Start Installation on the redirected page and configure it accordingly with the previous Mysql configuration:

    * Database server type: MySQL
    * Hostname: localhost
    * User: dotproject
    * Password: dotproject
    * User persistent connection: (unchecked)
    * Drop existing database: (unchecked)

And press Install db & write cfg.

Depending on the read/write permission on the dotproject directory and your apache configuration, you will see an error poiting out that the configuration file could not be written. If this is the case, you only need to create manually /var/www/dotproject/include/config.php with the contents you see on the browser, something like that:

{{{
<?php
if (!defined('DP_BASE_DIR')) {
        die('You should not access this file directly.');
}
### Copyright (c) 2004, The dotProject Development Team dotproject.net and sf.net/projects/dotproject ###
### All rights reserved. Released under GPL License. For further Information see LICENSE ###

### CONFIGURATION FILE AUTOMATICALLY GENERATED BY THE DOTPROJECT INSTALLER ###
### FOR INFORMATION ON MANUAL CONFIGURATION AND FOR DOCUMENTATION SEE ./includes/config-dist.php ###

$dPconfig['dbtype'] = 'mysql';
$dPconfig['dbhost'] = 'localhost';
$dPconfig['dbname'] = 'dotproject';
$dPconfig['dbuser'] = 'dp_user';
$dPconfig['dbpass'] = 'dp_pass';
$dPconfig['dbpersist'] = false;
$dPconfig['root_dir'] = $baseDir;
$dPconfig['base_url'] = $baseUrl;
?>
}}}

Enter dotproject for the first time: http://localhost/dotproject (admin/passwd)

And that’s it! Now change the admin password and enjoy the work of the dotproject folks!