#summary Functional programming with Ruby

<wiki:toc max_depth="2" />

= Introduction =

{{{x = x + 1}}}

In the good old days when we were in school we probably would have been puzzled by this line. Which magical *x* is this that can be added one and yet remain unchanged. Somehow, we started programming and we didn't mind anymore.
 
Well, we thought, that's not a serious issue; programming is about getting real business done and there's no need to quibble over mathematic purity (let the loony bearded guys in universities deal with it). But it turns out we were wrong, we were paying a high price, only that we didn't know it. 

- _Is the imperative programming stronger?_
- No, no, no. Only quicker, easier, more seductive_

= The theory = 

From the [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_programming Wikipedia]: "Functional programming is a programming paradigm that treats computation as the evaluation of mathematical functions and avoids state and mutable data". In other words, functional programming promotoes code with no side effects, no change of variables (which we may call now "symbols"). It oposes to imperative programming, which enfatizes change of state.

Surprisingly, that's all there is to it. So what are the advantages? 

== Code more clear ==

"Variables" are not modified once defined, so we don't have to follow the change of state to comprehend what a function/method/class/project works.

== Referential transparency ==

Expressions can be replaced by its values. If we call a function with the same parameters, we know for sure the output will be the same (there is no state anywhere that would change it). There is a reason for which Einstein defined _insanity_ as "doing the same thing over and over again and expecting different results". 

Referential transparency opens the gate to some nice things: 

 - Parallelization: If calls to functions are independent, they may be executed in different processes, machines, whatever, without race-condition issues. All the nasty details of "normal" concurrency code (locks, semaphors and so on) just vanish on the functional world. 
 
 - Memoization. A function call is equivalent to its return value, so output may be cached for later calls.  
 
== Modularization ==

We have no state that pervades the whole code, so we build our project with small, black boxes that we tie together (bottom-up programming).

== Ease of debugging == 

Functions are isolated, they only depend on their input and their output, so they are very easy to debug.

= Functional programming in Ruby =

This is all great, but how can we apply it to our daily-programming in Ruby (which is, indeed, not a functional language)? FP is, in its general sense, a style, it may be used in any language. Of course it will be the more natural way on languages specially designed for the paradigm, but to some extend, it can be applied to any language.

Let's be clear about this: this guide does not pretend to promote bizarre style just to adhere to theoretical functional purity. On the contrary, the point that I am trying to make is that we should use FP whenever it *increases* the quality of code, otherwise it's just a bad solution. 

== Don't update variables ==

Don't update them, just create new ones.

=== Don't append to arrays or strings === 

No:

{{{
indexes = [1, 2, 3]
indexes << 4
indexes # [1, 2, 3, 4]
}}}

Yes:

{{{
indexes = [1, 2, 3]
all_indexes = indexes + [4] # [1, 2, 3, 4]
}}} 

=== Don't update hashes === 

No:

{{{
hash = {:a => 1, :b => 2}
hash[:c] = 3
hash
}}}

Yes:

{{{
hash = {:a => 1, :b => 2}
new_hash = hash.merge(:c => 3) 
}}} 

=== Don't use bang methods which modify in-place ===

No:

{{{
string = "hello"
string.gsub!(/l/, 'z')
string # "lezzo"
}}}

Yes:

{{{
string = "hello"
new_string =  string.gsub(/l/, 'z') # "lezzo"
}}}

=== How to accumulate values ===

No:

{{{
output = []
output << 1
output << 2 if i_have_to_add_two
output << 3
}}}

Yes: 

{{{
output = [1, (2 if i_have_to_add_two), 3].compact
}}}

== Blocks as higher order functions ==

If a language is to be used functionally we need higher-order functions. That's it, functions can take other functions as parameters, and can also return other functions. 

Ruby (along with Smalltalk and some others) is special in this regard, the facility is built-in in the language: *blocks*. A block is an anonymous piece of code you can pass around and execute at will. Let's see typical usage of blocks to build functional constructions.

=== init-empty + each + push = map ===

No: 

{{{
dogs = []
["milu", "rantanplan"].each do |name|
  dogs << name.upcase
end
dogs # => ["MILU", "RANTANPLAN"]
}}}

Yes:

{{{
dogs = ["milu", "rantanplan"].map do |name|
  name.upcase
end # => ["MILU", "RANTANPLAN"]
}}}

=== init-empty + each + conditional push -> select/reject ===

No:

{{{
dogs = []
["milu", "rantanplan"].each do |name|
  if name.size == 4
    dogs << name
  end
end
dogs # => ["milu"]
}}}

Yes:

{{{
dogs = ["milu", "rantanplan"].select do |name|
  name.size == 4
end # => ["milu"]
}}}

=== initialize + each + accumulate -> inject ===

No:

{{{
length = 0
["milu", "rantanplan"].each do |dog_name|
  length += dog_name.length
end
length # => 15
}}}

Yes:

{{{
length = ["milu", "rantanplan"].inject(0) do |accumulator, dog_name|
  accumulator + dog_name.length
end # => 15
}}}

In this particular case, when there is a simple operation between accumulator and element, we don't need to write the block, just pass the operation symbol:

{{{
length = ["milu", "rantanplan"].inject(0, :+) # 15
}}}

=== empty + each + accumulate + push -> scan ===

Imagine you don't want only the final result of a fold (the inject we saw before) but also the partial values. In imperative code you'd write:

{{{
lengths = []
total_length = 0
["milu", "rantanplan"].each do |dog_name|
  lengths << total_length
  total_length += dog_name.length
end
lengths # [0, 4, 15]
}}}

In the functional world, Haskell calls it [http://zvon.org/other/haskell/Outputprelude/scanl_f.html scan], C++ calls it [http://www.cplusplus.com/reference/std/numeric/partial_sum/ partial_sum], Clojure calls it [http://clojuredocs.org/clojure_core/clojure.core/reductions reductions]. Ruby, surprisingly, has no such function, let's write our own. How about that:

{{{
lengths = ["milu", "rantanplan"].partial_inject(0) do |dog_name|
  dog_name.length
end # [0, 4, 15]
}}}

{{{Enumerable#partial_inject}}} can be written:

{{{
module Enumerable
  def partial_inject(initial_value, &block)
    self.inject([initial_value, [initial_value]]) do |(accumulated, output), element|
      new_value = yield(accumulated, element)
      [new_value, output + [new_value]]
    end         
  end
end
}}}

The details of the implementation are not important, what matters is that when we identify a interesting pattern to be abstract, we wrote it down in a separate library, we documented it, we thoroughly tested it, and we let that the real needs refine it.
 
=== How to create a hash from an enumerable ===

Vanilla Ruby has no direct translation from Enumerable to Hash (a sad flaw, in my opinion). That's why novices keep writing this terrible pattern (and how can you blame them?):

{{{
hash = {}
input.each do |item|
  hash[item] = process(item)
end
hash
}}}

This is hideous. Period. But is there anything better at hand? on the past the {{{Hash}}} constructor required a flatten collection of consecutive _key/value_ (ugh, a flatten array to describe a mapping?). Fortunately, latest versions of Ruby also take _key/value_ pairs, which makes much more sense (as the reverse operation of {{{hash.to_a}}}), and now you can write:

{{{
Hash[input.map do |item|
  [item, process(item)]
end]
}}}

Not bad, but it kind of breaks the natural writing directionality. In Ruby we expect to write from left to right, calling methods for objects. If we used {{{Hash}}} we would have to go back. The "good" functional way is to use inject:

{{{
input.inject({}) do |hash, item|
  hash.merge(item => process(item))
end
}}}

We all agree this is verbose and distracting, so we better move it as a method in the module Enumerable, which is exactly what [https://github.com/rubyworks/facets Facets] does. They call it {{{Enumerable#mash}}}:

{{{
module Enumerable
  def mash(&block)
    self.inject({}) do |output, item|
      key, value = block_given? ? yield(item) : item
      output.merge(key => value)
    end
  end
end
}}}
  
{{{
["functional", "programming", "rules"].map { |s| [s, s.length] }.mash
# {"rules"=>5, "programming"=>11, "functional"=>10}
}}}

Or in a single step using mash using the optional block:

{{{
[["functional", "programming", "rules"].mash { |s| [s, s.length] }]
# {"rules"=>5, "programming"=>11, "functional"=>10}
}}}

== Narrowing down the scope ==

Joe Armstrong (the creator of Erlang) discussed in "Coders At work" about the reusability of Object-Oriented Programming: 

"I think the lack of reusability comes in object-oriented languages, not in functional languages. Because the problem with object-oriented languages is they’ve got all this implicit environment that they carry around with them. You wanted a banana but what you got was a gorilla holding the banana and the entire jungle."

To be fair, in my opinion it's not an intrinsic problems of OOP. You can write OOP code that is functional, but standard OOP certainly promotes coupling between code.

The point is that FP is a collection of black-boxes where only their input and output matters, they can be studied in isolation. And not only the collection of functions, but also the functions themselves: when variables are modified in-place, you have to follow all the code to see where and how the variable was modified. This is the source of bugs and uncountable hours of painful debugging.

== In Ruby everything is an expression ==

You may write this:

{{{
if found_dog == our_dog 
  name = found_dog.name
  message = "We found our dog #{name}!"
else
  message = "No luck"
end
}}}

But control-structures like {{{if}}}, {{{while}}}, {{{case}}} and so on also return an expression in Ruby, so there is no reason we use not only as branching with imperative commands but functionally, as code that returns something: 

{{{
message = if found_dog == my_dog
  name = found_dog.name
  "We found our dog #{name}!"
else
  "No luck"
end
}}}

It's not only that we don't repeat the variable name {{{message}}, what it's really imporant is that the intent is a lot more clear: there is a bunch of code which may be large, but we can concentrate on what it returns ({{{message}}}). 

== Recursion ==

Pure functional languages, having no implicit state, use recursion a lot. To avoid infite stacks, functional languages have a mechanism called tail-recursion optimization (TCO). Ruby 1.9 has this mechanism coded but it's disabled by default, so you don't use it if you expect your code to work everywhere.

However, in certain circumstances recursion is still valid and usable, even if a new stack is created on each recursion. Note also that some functional tools (specially foldings like {{{Enumerable#inject}}}) are recursive loops in disguise. 

It's sometimes advisable to build your own functional construction (even if internally they implemented imperatively). Let's see an example: how to convert an imperative loop with state to functional:

{{{
def process_state_machine
  state = :off
  while true
    state = case get_action
    when :turn_on
      :on
    when :turn_off
      :off
    en  
  end
end
}}} 

You see that state is being changed on each iteration. But we can easily abstract it ({{{Object#state_loop}}}):

{{{
def process_state_machine
  state_loop(:off) do |state|
    case get_action
    when :turn_on
      :on
    when :turn_off
      :off
    en  
  end
end 
}}}

== Lazy enumerators ==

Lazy evaluation delays the evaluation of the expression untils it's needed, as opposed to eager evaluation, where expression are calculated when a variable is assigned, a function called, etc, even if it's not used later anywhere. Laziness is not a requisite for FP, but it's a strategy that fits nicely on the paradigm (Haskell is probably the best example, laziness pervades the language). 

Ruby uses, basically, eager evaluation (though as many other languages, it does not evaluate expressions on conditionals if not reached, it short-circuits boolean operators &&, ||, etc). However, as any language with high-order function, delayed evaluation is supported implicitly because the programmer decide when blocks are going to be called.

Aslo, enumerators are available from Ruby 1.9 (also as an extension in 1.8) and they provide a clean interface for defining lazy enumerables. The classical example is to build a numerator that returns _all_ the natural numbers:

{{{
require 'backports' # needed only for 1.8
natural_numbers = Enumerator.new do |yielder|
  number = 1
  loop do
    yielder.yield number
    number += 1
  end
end
}}}

Which could be re-written in a more functional spirit:

{{{
natural_numbers = Enumerator.new do |yielder|
  (1..1.0/0).each do |number|
    yielder.yield number
  end
end
}}}
 
{{{
natural_numbers.take(10)
# [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10]
}}}

Now, try to do a {{{map}}} on {{{natural_numbers}}}, what happens? it never ends. Standard enumerable methods (map, select, etc) are strict, so they will first try to convert the enumerable object to an array, do the map and return the result (also, an array). This obviously won't work if the input is an infinite stream. Let's extend the {{{Enumerator}}} class, for example with a {{{Enumerator#map}}}:

{{{
class Enumerator
  def map(&block)
    Enumerator.new do |yielder|
      self.each do |value|
        yielder.yield(block.call(value))
      end
    end
  end
end
}}}

And now we can do a map on our stream of all natural numbers:

{{{
natural_numbers.map { |x| 2*x }.take(10)
# [2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20]
}}}

This is just the basic of it, if you find this stuff interesting, you should take a look at Facets' [http://rdoc.info/github/rubyworks/facets/master/Denumerable denumerables] and see all the cool things you can do with Ruby enumerators.

=== Advantages of lazy evaluation ===

1. The obvious: you don't build and store complete structures if you don't need to (which may be efficient in CPU, memory, or both). 

2. Not so obvious: Lazy evaluation makes possible to write code that does not know (not want to know) more that it needs to. Let's see an example: you wrote a solver of some kind that yields infinite number of solutions, but at some point you only want the first 10. You'd write something like:

{{{
solver(input, :max => 10) 
}}}

When you are working with lazy structures there is no need to say when to stop. The caller decides how many values it wants. The code becomes simplier and the responsibility goes where it should be, to the caller:

{{{
solver(input).take(10)
}}}

== A practical example ==

Exercise: "How many natural numbers you must take before the accumulative sum of them does not exceed 100?". 

A functional approach could be (requires methods: {{{Enumerator#partial_inject}}}, {{{Enumerator#take_while}}}, {{{Enumerator#enumerate}}}, {{{Enumerator#last}}}):
 
{{{
natural_numbers.partial_inject(0, :+).take_while { |x| x < 100 }.enumerate.last[1]
# 13 (correct: 1 + .. + 13 = 91, 1 + .. + 14 = 105)
}}}

Let's compare it with the equivalent imperative version: 

{{{
n = 1
acc = n
while acc + n < 100
  n += 1
  acc += n
end
n # 13
}}}

I hope this example shows some of the advantages we discussed in this document:

 1. Compactness: You'll write less code. Functional code deals with expressions, and expressions are chainable; imperative code deals with variable modifications (statements), which are not chainable. You can argue that we are hiding a lot of code here ({{{partial_inject}}}, {{{take_while}}}, ...), and I am glad you brought it up because that's exactly what we are doing. Hiding generic, reusable code, that's what all programming -but specially functional programming- is about, about writing abstractions. We are not really happy because we write less lines of code, but because we reduced the complexity of our code by identifying reusable patterns.

 2. More declarative: Look at the imperative version, it's an amorph bunch of code that at first glance -not being commented- you have absolute no idea what it may be doing. You may say: 'well, let's start here, jot down the values for {{{n}}} and {{{acc}}}, do some loops, see how they evolve, look at the last iteration' and so on.  The functional version on the other hand needs no comment: it builds bottom-up with small, generic, simple tools programmers are already familiar with. It describes, it declares what it's doing, not how it's doing it.

In other words: "Functional programming is like describing your problem to a mathematician. Imperative programming is like giving instructions to an idiot" (arcus, #scheme on Freenode).

= Conclusion =

A better understanding of the principles of Functional Programming will help us to write more clear, reusable and compact code. Ruby is basically an imperative language, but it also has great functional capabilities, know when and how to use them (and when not to). Be your motto "state is the root of all evil" and avoid it whenever possible.

= Further reading =

http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Functional_programming

http://www.defmacro.org/ramblings/fp.html

http://www.cse.chalmers.se/~rjmh/Papers/whyfp.html

http://www.khelll.com/blog/ruby/ruby-and-functional-programming/

http://www.bestechvideos.com/2008/11/30/rubyconf-2008-better-ruby-through-functional-programming